Everybody, thank you so much for joining us today. Welcome to the
RStudio Enterprise Community Meetup. I'm Rachel Dempsey. I'm
calling in from Boston today. As you can see, we're doing things
a little bit different from normal meetups today and are
streaming out to LinkedIn, Facebook, YouTube and Twitter. A
huge thank you to Tom Mock who's hanging out and helping behind
the scenes as well. I'm also joined by my colleague today,
Phil Bauscher.
Hey, everybody, thanks for coming. I'm Phil Bauscher, the
Director of Life Sciences and Healthcare here at RStudio.
If you've just joined now, feel free to also introduce
yourselves through the chat window of wherever you're
watching from and say hello, maybe where you're calling in
from. But for anybody who's joining this group for the
first time, this is a friendly and open meetup environment for
teams to share the work they're doing within their organization
and teach lessons learned, network with each other, and
really just allow us all to learn from each other. So thank
you all for always making this such a welcoming community. We
really want to create spaces where everybody can participate
and we can hear from everyone. So I'd like to reiterate that we
love to hear from everyone, no matter your level of experience
or industry that you work in as well. While you can ask
questions on whichever platform you're watching from, you can
also ask questions anonymously as well, through the Slido that
we have, which I'll put up right here on the screen. But we are
so excited to have so many members of the pharma community
here today as well. So I'd love to use this opportunity to also
share some information about a few other pharma communities and
hand it over to Phil Bauscher from our team, who is the best
resource for all that.
Awesome. Thank you, Rachel. Very excited to be here today. So
this is the sixth installment of our Life Sciences series.
Previously, we've highlighted webinars by GSK, by Novaris,
Roche, and Genentech, by Johnson & Johnson, and even the EPA. And
you can find these webinars on our Life Sciences champion page,
which Rachel is going to highlight now on the screen. Over
the last seven years at our studio, my team and I have helped
many, many organizations use R for submissions, especially in
the PK PD space. And I would say in the last two to three years,
there's been a lot of interest to use R for late stage clinical
trials. And many of the organizations that we work with,
you know, they have different approaches to validation, to
qualification, for risk, for reporting. And you can find some
of our supporting documents that we have on our pharma page that
Rachel is showing here. At the R in Pharma gathering that happens
every year, you can see many of talks from the past conferences
that highlight different approaches to submissions and how
organizations are handling some of these things. Also, I'll
point out that the R in Pharma conference is coming up. It's a
free virtual conference will be in November. And we hope to
highlight both how small and large organizations are
clinical submissions using R. And today we're going to be
featuring one way that an organization has approached this,
which is through Merck. And this is really going to highlight the
awesome work from Nan Zhao, Yi Long, our speaker, Keven
Anderson, Sarah Wang, Simya Yi, and countless, countless others,
people at Merck that have helped to enable the R reporting as
well as documenting it for the community. It's just really
fantastic. And, you know, one example of this, which is very
exciting, is the use of the R package GS design, Keven
Anderson leads up, that was used for the Moderna vaccine. And so
at R in Pharma last year, this webinar that we're featuring for
you today was one of the most highly attended bookings of the
highly attended booked up webinars or workshops that we
had. And it's so exciting that we get to bring this for the
community today and bring it to a larger audience and highlight
this fantastic work from Merck. And so it's with a great
pleasure that I'll pass it over now to Yi Long to highlight and
talk about this work that they're doing.
And I'll just also say, as mentioned earlier, we will have
time for a Q&A as well. So you can put your questions into
wherever you're watching from, or use the Slido link, which
I'll pull up once again, right here. But I'm so excited to be
joined by Yi Long Zhang, now from the health technology
research team at MEDA, to talk about his experience at Merck,
where he focused on developing clinical workflows and clinical
reporting, and has been an amazing addition to the
community. So with all of that, thank you all again for joining
us. It's amazing to see such a great group of people here. And
I would love to turn it over to you, Yi Long. And we will go
backstage. I'll bring you on here.
Yeah, thank you, Rachel, for that step. And thank you, Phil,
for the great introductory. Yeah, today, I'd like to share
over experience of using R for clinical study report and
submission. And this is a work where at Merck, to work with a
group of talented members, within and across the pharma, to
share how we are thinking of the recommendation and experience
for late stage clinical trial to submit a work to the FDA or for
the other regulatory agencies. So the so called ECD package to
their portal. And before I start, just a general disclaimer.
So all opinion expressed here just for my own and doesn't
represent any organization. And some of the slides here, once
you get a link, you probably get scroll down to save some for
content. So before we start, I think it's just to reinforce the
clarification from FDA, right from FDA's statistical software
clarification statement, it's clear to see that FDA doesn't
require use of any specific software for the statistical
analysis for clinical trials. But there's definitely a
requirement to fulfill the 21 CFR part 11 to complete the
qualification of the software, and also to conduct analysis in
a GXP manner. So for here, it's more like we share how we are
thinking to execute following this clarification statement to
meet the requirement from regulatory agency to complete
the analysis, and also to generate a report that's ready
for the submission. So we regard to the motivation why we need to
use R or different R package for regulatory development, right. So
for late stage, it's also have many of the space that have a
lot of the nice package to be used for the clinical trial
development. For example, R has been widely used for clinical
trial study design, for example, for group sequential
design. As Phil mentioned, the GXP package for group
sequential design has been widely used within Merck or
beyond. And also recently, the development of non-proportional
head group sequential design is also under development in R and
handy and publicly available. And last year, Kevin just gave a
nice seminar to the Deming conference to go through the
information. And if you're interested, you can go to this
book down project to see all the information. And secondly,
so recently, you can see a trend of using estimate framework
following the ICH ENI R1 addendum. So in response that
noble missing data approach may need to be applied. For
example, in recent paper, we collaborate with academia
members for recurrent event data and robustness of missing data.
All those methods have been implemented as an R package and
publicly available. So when clinical trials try to apply
those noble methods to their trial, instead of re-implementing
other software, maybe we can just apply those R packages
available to the clinical trial study with the proper manner
that package has been qualified and tested before it can be used
for the final results. And as you may be aware, R is also
widely used for Bayesian statistics with a popular
package like STAN to be able to handle the Bayesian modeling
part for hierarchical modeling. And sometimes for the network
meta-analysis in HTA space, the drug reimbursement analysis can
also be applied in this framework. So in addition, R
always has a strength for the virtualization part. So there
are some dedicated work related to the pharma, for example, the
Safety Graphics Working Group has created a nice shiny app to
summarize a bunch of commonly used safety graphs. And also
another example, like we're exploring how we can use an
interactive forest plot to help simplify the DMC safety
monitoring review. So if you are interested, there's a recent
talk by our colleague, Yu Jie, at the IAM Pharma Conference to
highlight how this small package forestly can be used to
create an interactive forest plot to aggregate the safety
information and to have a quick review and digest by the DMC
member. So these are some motivations that drive us to
explore more of a proper and compliant way of using R for
regulatory submission. So for some background, the work here
we're still trying to follow the ICH guidance, right? For the
clinical study report, we're following ICH E3 to structure
the content of a clinical study report. And for the company
book, r4csr.org contains all the detailed information step by
step how we can create some example tables using the tool
we provided. And also we're trying to fill the gap to
streamline the workflow, right? So in the same book, we try to
discuss what's the concept for project management in clinical
trial study space and provide some recommendations for that.
And in the end, the most important part, once we complete
analysis in R, we need to find a way to properly submit the
results and the source code and data to the regulatory agency
through the format required by the regulatory agency. That's
basically this ECTD format required by most of the global
submission situation for drug development. And for the table
lists and figures, for this talk, all the focus is still to
deliver the results in RTF or Microsoft Word format, because
in most of the pharma companies, the RTF or Microsoft Word still
play a central role to combine all the table lists and figures
into the clinical study reports. So to collaborate with
conditions and with the medical writing and the regulatory
group, right? So people still using the Microsoft Word as a
like a key component to combine all the things together. So
that's how we play the focus on the Microsoft Word workflow,
right? And also acknowledge that different organizations can have
different ways to complete their clinical study report, and the
table standard can be different. So this is one recommendation
how we at Merck is handling those framework. And so for part
that we work open space is about our consortium pilot submission,
right? So our consortium frame a nice working group to organize
people from both the regulatory agency and the pharma companies
in different representative to get everyone set together. And
also to think how we can submit the work completing to the FDA.
So with this nice working group, so we contribute together totally
in open space area. So you can go to the link like to identify
who's member and affiliations. And for now, what I'm trying to
share is outstanding work by this working group for the first
pilot, that we are able to prepare the analysis package and
prepare it into the ECTD format and then submit to FDA with
review. And here's just a short timeline, right? So about
November last year, so we initiate this submission to FDA,
and then receive the FDA response in December. So in the
response, we received some feedback and comments. So we try
to address them and submit a revised submission to the FDA.
And in March this year, we received a final FDA response.
And all those submission and response letter available on our
consortium GitHub website that we will also have link in
following slides. So interested in the detail how the package
was organized, and how those response communication between
the working group and FDA. So all the information available on
GitHub website, so you can review and explore. So while we
are dealing with this first pilot submission, so few
challenges that we need to solve. The first one is that
every organization will develop some internal package, for
example, to streamline the workflow to wrap up some open
source package available to a way that easy to be create the
table figure layout following the internal standard. So, so
you always need to have some internal code that need to be
shared with regulatory agency. So one question is how we can
submit those internal develop appropriate package to the FDA,
right? Because in the ECTD format, there are some
restrictions that you submit, for example, we're not allowed
to submit a lead file within the ECTD package, and all the
filenames should be in lowercases without any special
character, right? And all the content should be in ASIC 2
format. So how are we going to deal with this with a simplified
way? So that's the first challenge we try to resolve. And
basically, a simple solution is to use a package called package
light, we will briefly introduce in following slides. And the
second part is how we can follow the ICH or FDA guidance in
preparing the ECTD package, right? ECTD have multiple
modules, and typically we're following all the contents in
the module five. That's basically the data set and the
program for clinical study report. And for the data part,
typically, we still follow in the standard requirement to use
XPT format, and also have a package to create those things.
But for the first pilot, we try to focus on the analysis part by
assuming all those XPT data set is already available, how we're
able to submit the analysis program to the regulatory
agency, right? And the last part, even though FDA didn't
expect all the code is executable or reproducible from
FDA review perspective, we still try to think how we can enhance
the reproducibility from FDA reviewers perspective, right?
How they can rerun all the analysis code we provided in the
ECTD package in an easier manner, right? So what kind of
step by step instruction we need to provide into the analysis
data in your guide? So those are the challenge we're trying
to resolve in the first pilot submission with some simple
analysis. And just highlight again that assumption here still
about the analysis and the reporting part for the first
pilot, we're not yet to touch the ADaM data set or SDTM data
set generation to support analysis yet. But that can
potentially be some future work for future pilots work. So once
we complete the first pilot, there are a few deliverables we
combined into the ECTD submission package. So the
first one, we're able to create a sudo proprietary R package, I
call it sudo because it's also available on GitHub. So you can
check what the package looks like. And also, we provide R
scripts for the analysis as also on GitHub repo. And then as part
of the ECTD package, we also need to provide an analysis data
review guide to detail like, for example, what's a version of R
and R package, and what's a step by step instruction to rerun the
code, and also where to find the data set and output into the
ECTD package. So all those information will be saved into
the review guide and also be available on the ECTD package.
So in reproduce the work, there are two open source GitHub
repo. So the first one is more from development perspective,
like as an organization, we need a space to save all the source
code documentation, right. So that's all saved in this
development repo to represent as an organization, how we can
organize all those information together. And the current
recommendation for the first part is using R package for the
structure to organize all the information as needed. And those
details also be discussed in the R4CSR book. And the second part,
once an organization complete the development, then we need to
reorg the information for the necessary part to be put into the
ECTD package into the module five of the submission package
specifically. So in that part, this is a second repo called
ECTD package repo, that basically count only the ECTD
part that required to be submitted through the FDA portal
to the agency, right. And once we complete the ECTD submission, so
our consortium provide a nice announcement to summarize the
treatment of this work. And probably you hear also from the
LinkedIn or from other channel to see how this announcement
happens, right. So we also provide link here just in case
you want to check the details. And after we submit the ECTD
package, the initial one to the FDA. So this is some highlight
of the response from the FDA. So first, FDA reviewer confirmed
that by using the R version 4.1.1, FDA was able to run the
submitted code and confirm the applicant table and the submitted
figure in report here, basically the PDF file combined table is
reproducible. And also FDA reviewer developed their own code
to cross check the results, right. So the analyst was able
to independently generate all those tables using the submitted
data. And there are also some minor comments being identified
by FDA reviewer that we basically try to address in the
revised submission. And if you are interested in those minor
comments or suggestions, you can take a look at the initial
submission FDA response, that's for FDA letters to document the
details. And for the revised submission, we basically to
address those comments identified in the first
submission. And once we receive a response, basically FDA agrees
that the initial phase of this first pilot submission has been
completed. And if you're interested on the revised one,
you can also go to the second link here to see the results.
And once we complete the first pilot, the working group team
members start to brainstorm, what can we provide more to the
community, what will be our future work for the second or
potentially third pilot submission. So there are a few
things being identified, and team member working on those
efforts. For example, we want to see if it's possible to submit
a Shiny app within the ECTD package to the FDA. So the FDA
reviewer can rerun the Shiny app in their local machine and to
start to explore and digest information more efficiently.
In an interactive way, right. And second part, so the first
pilot only target on FDA, but for an organization, typically
we are thinking about global submission for drug development,
right. So we also try to identify the potential point of
contact for different regulatory agencies, for example, in EU, in
China, Japan, and see if we can also start first pilot to those
regulatory agency and hear feedback to continue improve
the workflow to potentially prepare for submission using R
for global regulatory submission. And in addition, for
the first submission, the analysis is quite simple, and
like simply the baseline correctness table, some AE
summary table, or a simple ANCOVA analysis for efficacy,
right. There could be more advanced analysis requires some
complicated R package with certain system dependency, right.
So we'd like to also explore the possibility of submission with
some advanced analysis to the master, for example, for study
design or for missing data and for Bayesian method as we
discussed in the motivation of this work. So once we discuss
some high level information about the FDA pilot submission.
So I would like to go a little bit deep on how we are thinking
about reproducibility. And also based on the guidance from FDA,
some recommendations we can take from the pilot submission. So
these diagrams borrow from Roger Poe's famous science paper in
2011 to discuss reproducibility in general, right. So this
diagram basically show the concept between the four
replication, which represent, we can fully represent a data set
and analysis, right, which is unlikely to happen in clinical
trial space, because how expensive a clinical trial could
be, right. So most likely, over reproducibility is more
referring to the code part, right, with a given data set
generated from a clinical trial. So how we can reproduce the
analysis from the data set. So that's basically the part from
the code side. And within the code side, there's also multiple
levels about the reproducibility. So for the
first part, right, so if we have some internal develop our
package, then we need to version it and we need to reproduce with
a certain version, right. And second part, there's also open
space, our version, our package version need to be managed. So
ensure the reproducibility. And in addition, sometimes you may
see some discrepancy for the results between operation
system. This is also true for many other software, right. So
the assumption is within an operation system, then we
reproduce results. I think that's also the concept like
why we need a contender for many of the analysis to ensure
reproducibility, right. And one more, even more challenging
situation that in very real cases, you may get some trouble
with different hardware, even though we are running the same
operation system, or you're on the same R and R package
version. I will say this part is really unlikely to happen. But I
just want to highlight this is also the part of need to be
considered if we're doing something seriously. But for
now, over reproducibility is only focused on the first two
part, you know, both R version and about R package version
within a predefined operation system and hardware. So in that
case, this is how we are discussed the reproducibility.
And with this given definition, so we start to reveal the
requirement from FDA, like how FDA was thinking about
reproducibility of the code. So from FDA study data technical
conformance guide, we would just quote this paragraph.
Basically, from the sponsor perspective, we need to provide
a software program, we need to provide the Adam data set used
to generate the table and figure associated with the primary and
secondary efficacy analysis. In other words, the CT analysis
code typically considered as optional, right. So the focus
from FDA perspective is to run the source code for primary and
secondary efficacy analysis. And the second part, the specific
software utilized should be specified in the analysis data
review guide, like which R version, which R package version
need to be documented properly to ensure the reproducibility.
And also, FDA tried to highlight that is to understand the
process by which the variable for the respective analysis was
were created and to confirm the analysis algorithm. Basically,
our understanding is that FDA
did I say recording?
It still sounds good to me.
Oh, yeah. Okay, yeah, I just get my own voice. Okay, probably
let's continue. So, in that case of understanding that, so FDA
did expect the code can directly be executable from the end. And
the goal to have those software program is to understand which
variable in the atom data set has been used for the analysis,
and which exact analysis algorithm, for example, for
ANCOVA model, what's your model terms, what's your missing data
strategy to handle them in the code space, right, because that's
exactly what we do in the analysis. And also FDA expect
the software program should be asked to text format. In other
words, those Azure crafter shouldn't be put in the source
code. So to achieve that, here's some recommendations from over
end. So first, when we're doing the final analysis for the
clinical study report, we need to fix the R version, for
example, R4.1.1.0. And also we need to fix a snapshot date, for
example, August 31st, 2021. The purpose to have a snapshot date
is to fix the RPEC version we are using for the analysis. And
this is both achievable by the RStudio public patch manager.
And also for the current time machine created by the M1, or if
within your organization, you have a commercial version of the
RStudio patch manager, you can have a time machine to both
froze the internal and external developed RPEC. So this is how a
snapshot date can be helpful to pre-specify the RPEC version. In
the final analysis, you still need to specify each version of
the RPEC used for the analysis. And also, we need to consider
flexibility of input and output paths. Because when your code
is sent to the FDA reviewer part, the source code paths for
the data set will be different. So some guidance to update the
paths of the input and output should be provided in the NS
reviewer data guide. And also, lots of paths should be
clarified into the ADR. And based on our understanding,
typically, the FDA reviewer is doing the analysis in the
Windows machine. And for some organization, maybe we complete
our analysis in a different operation system, for example,
Linux server. So in that case, we want to rerun the ECTD
package and try running it over Windows machine as well, to
ensure it's fully reproducible from the sponsor end before we
do the submission. And all those steps can be detailed in the
ADRG appendix. And in the first pilot, we provide an example of
step-by-step instruction in that case. So here, we go to a little
more detail about the implementation part, how this
was handled. So in general, we share the same philosophy as
heavily recommends for the package, right? So we just quote
here, so anything can be automated should be automated.
So we want to do as little as possible by hand, we want to do
as much as possible with functions. That's why we're
trying to create R packages to simplify the workflow. And also
goal for all the developers to see more of what needs to be
deliverable, instead of to worry about what our package looks
like, right? So we want to bundle them together and be
available in open space. And here are a few tools we developed
to simplify that. So the first part is how we can generate a
production-ready table and figures in RTF format. So that's
how we create a package called R2RTF to achieve that. And
second part is mentioned how to get all those internal R package
available into the EC2D package. So we create a package called
package-alike to represent R package into the pure TXT format
and also can revert and also install back into the reverse
machine. And the last piece under internal validation is how
we can create a portable R environment to help the reviewer
or have the dry run to complete analysis. Because on your
machine, you can have different R versions, different R packages
into your user space, right? What if the submission package
have different R and R package versions, right? You want to
have a self-contained folder to reproduce that. Once you
complete that, you can just delete and that doesn't have
impact for your system. And all the details is available in
R4CSR book. So if you are interested, you can go there to
find the detail. For now, I just gave some highlight. So for
the first one is about R2RTF. It contains several functions to
pipe together to generate an RTF format. So that basically
assume the data set is already available. For example, you can
handle that in tidyverse or other package. Once the data
set is available, R2RTF will format it into the RTF for the
production. It's also available to do the same work. For
example, Rosh create R package R table to do a simple execute
format. And Artoros have a package for Tharma RTF to also
create tables in RTF format. And there's also other general
tools like GT or X table and other tool available. So for
here, it's just for open organization to try to use this
package to generate the files, but it's not necessary to be the
only solution. And the second part is about to combine all the
internal R package together into one TXT file that be able
to sync into the ECT package module file. So Petulite is a
tool to pack all packets into the plain text. It's also
grammar to specify which part of your internal package need to
be packed. For example, you don't have to pack your testing
code, you don't have to pack all of the R package to your part
for the goal is to have the source code in the R folder to
be executable from a reviewer part. Right. Also, it creates a
standard, the TXT file can just be open and be reviewed. So you
can still take a look what has been assembled into the final
submission package. Right. So this is just an example code.
Once you provide the path to the package, we can call it, then we
have a convenient function to indicate what typically we
consider to be saving the ECT package. Right. And sometimes
you want to specify more, for example, you have some additional
material in the IST folder. You can also pack multiple R packages
into one file. So you have two packages internally developed
and saved into one TXT file. And once the TXT file is available,
people can just unpack in their local machine. And you can also
specify install equal to true, that automatically install into
your system. And the last piece is about a portable R environment.
Right. So to rerun the analysis, you probably need your .R
project file specified RStudio configuration, a .R profile, or
.R environment for that. Right. So to recreate the learning
environment. And that also being enabled in Kineslake. In
addition, we can install a specific version, for example,
R4.1.1 to a project folder. We can specify the R tools, because
some of R packages need to be compiled, we still need R tools
in that part. So all those information can be covered in
your Kineslake in this pipeline, and you can specify what
information you need in this portable environment. Once set
up, it can be used for the dry run, or for the FDA reviewer to
review your content to simplify multiple steps in the ADR here.
Okay, so as a summary, I will try to see as a US story. Right.
So for a statistician, we can use tidyverse, R2RTF, or other
internal tool to define the mock table, to create a listing and
figures for the statistical analysis of clinical trial,
because typically you have more than 100 tables and figures for
ethics and safety for drug or vaccine development. So you also
need a way to organize them efficiently. As a programmer, we
also use tidyverse or R2RTF as an internal tool to develop or
validate analysis results based on those mock tables. And as a
statistical programmer, we also need to use patching light, and
also as an internal tool to prepare those internal development
packages in a way that can be saved in the ECT distribution
package. And in the end, so as an internal external reviewer, we
use clean slate to reconstruct a portable environment to
reproduce analysis results. We try also to give recommendation
details in our alpha-CSR book. So for the photostructure part,
where you have more than 100 deliverables, how you organize
that. So our suggestion is to use a package of photostructure to
ensure the consistency, reproducibility, automation,
compliance, because there's already a lot of tools around our
package that allow you to do the analysis and do some compliance
check. So that's one way we're thinking our package structure
can potentially be used to organize all those things
together. And also for project management. So we also recommend
people to think in a trial way. So set up for success, and work
as a team, because you always have a multi-functional algorithm
to work together for the trial. We're also interested to design
clean code structure, right, to make sure you have proper
documentation, and relationship between all the functions so
other people can understand when they translate from project to
analysis. And also it's necessary to set capability
boundary, right? In that way, people can cross-boundary to
help, but also be clear the responsibility of each role. And
also importantly, we would recommend people to contribute
to the community. When you feel like a tool that doesn't relate
to the business logic, that can be a standalone R package, I
would like to share to the open space. In that way, we can
continue to grow and to find a consensus to improve the
workflow across the farm. And when we got to the software
development life cycle, it should also follow several
steps, like planning, development edition, operation
part. So in each of the steps, you need to be properly handled
for internal development R package, and also need to be
handled to qualify the external R package. So those
information can be referred to the R validation hub, white
paper, how the organization can achieve that. And there are many
cross-industry collaborations. So the work here cannot be
achieved without all those outstanding collaborations with
people from across pharma. So for example, if your interest is
to understand how to qualify external R package, I would
suggest to go to R validation hub website and potentially join
the working group. And there are several presentations being
handled previously to understand the workflow and tools
available. And for this talk, we discuss R-based submission
pilot, and more future work. So more than welcome to check the
website and join and contribute. And also, the R in pharma
conference is just wonderful. It helps us a lot to organize
together to share the ideas and information to collaborate. And
in addition, the Arkansas Docking Seminar Center is trying
to share the information including this VITA. So
continue to share the knowledge across the different organizations
and it's important to help to shape a better solution towards
the future. And for the future direction of the current work we
have, so we still try to enhance the compliance with the
disability because it began automation, right? We want to
also consider how we can assemble the metadata around the
analysis, as you probably hear like the effort for safety 360.
So we provide some prototype. There's some package called
MetaLite or MetaLite.ad on the GitHub work website. So in that
way, you can check how we are thinking how metadata was flowed
from the planning and reporting in the trial and report. We also
want to enable some advanced design special methods, and also
introduce some interactive visualization in the report for
the DMC. And also can be ways always out back and server.
That's basically conclude all my presentation today, and thank
you for listening.
Thank you so much, Yilong. You can't hear us clapping but we're
all clapping. Let me pull Phil back on stage too. Thank you so
much for a great presentation. I can see there's a lot of
questions coming in already. So we'll do our best to try and
aggregate them from everywhere. But I can see one question that
has been pinned to the chat from Manoj and apologies if I'm
pronouncing your name incorrectly. It is would R
replace SAS completely? Or its usage to some extent?
Yeah, we don't seem like R will replace SAS completely.
Yeah, it's more like we add a more additional tool to the
arsenal of the clinical trial development. Like within our
organization, definitely we can have different tools, even like
Python, Julia, potentially can be in the clinical trial
development, but we need a way to consider what would be a
compliant and proper process for the development.
Thank you. And I just want to remind people to that if you
want to ask questions anonymously as well, you can use
the Slido link that I just put up on the screen. But otherwise,
we're gathering questions from YouTube, Facebook, live stream
and Twitter. But I see one question that's been upvoted on
Slido from Kevin is, if not, if you're not using containers, is
Rm playing a role in documenting dependencies?
Yeah, of course, our package itself already have a well
defined dependent structure in the description file. You can
also use some nice package that I use to log the file package
version as well. And that's also why package light would also be
helpful because we just assemble all the package within a
TXT file. And you can also unpack them. So your R and R
package version has been fixed in the reviewer site. So I would
say a container is not necessary, but will be a good
add. But one challenge from FDA perspective is how we can
enable container environment from FDA perspective.
Awesome. Thank you.
I want to turn it over to Phil to ask one of the questions that
came. Yeah. So a lot of a lot of good ones coming in. But Yilong
one I thought you could help with here is a question says,
what's the difference between ECTD and SDTM formats? Is one
preferred and does your package only support one?
Okay, so we have two different concepts. So SDTM is a data
standard. So that's basically what's the source data should
be organized when you connect from the CRF. And ECTD is more
like a folder structure to organize a clinical study report
like all the files from the clinical implementation
operation, your clinical study report, your data set. So SDTM
data set, just one component stay in the ECTD package.
Thank you. I see. Okay, another upvoted question that came in
anonymously that I want to be sure to ask is I'm a grad
student with limited R experience, interested in trials.
The decision to make R my main software is a big one. So I
think they're talking about their decision to make R their
main tool. What are some of the reasons they may want to make
that switch?
I'm trying to understand. So definitely people have their own
comfort zone. They have their own set of preferences. So
definitely, I'm not saying that you can't make a switch. But
definitely people have their own comfort zone. They have
their favorite tools for development. But as an
organization, they have their own process, their standard, a
group of people share the same consensus, how we are going to
work. When people join an organization, I would suggest to
first follow their existing process and consensus. And also
to see if that match with your own interest and your comfort
zone. So I wouldn't say people need to change to use R or use
R. But I would say it's more like marketing great space. It's
better to learn multiple languages to learn and borrow
from the strengths of each language.
Fantastic. Awesome. I think I can take the next one, Rachel,
here. So to kind of switch up some of the topics a little bit,
someone says for deep learning, Python is a popular choice. What
efforts are made to address this in R? Yulong, has your team
at Merck tackled any of this?
No, I haven't tackled it yet. But I think it's a great question.
Yulong, has your team at Merck tackled any of the deep
learning space for clinical?
I have very little experience on this. But for us, I know you
have some outstanding tool. Maybe you got better.
Yeah, yeah. So I can attach some links to a workshop that we
teach. But there's been a lot of updates in this space. One is
the fact that there's the reticulate package, which helps
translate R to Python. It helps the interoperability between R
and Python. So that's a big piece of it. You can also just
come to Python directly, which is fantastic. And a lot of the
ecosystem now supports that. There's also the TensorFlow
package that's been created for R. JJ Allaire, our founder,
gave a great keynote on this at the 2018 RStudio conference.
So I'll put a link into the chat with some deep learning
examples. But yeah, I don't see a ton of this in clinical. But
I was just curious, Yulong, if it had come up for you.
I'm also going to share a link to a meetup that's coming up on
June 1st on using Python in RStudio team, if it's of
interest to anyone, too. I'll put it in the chat. But I see
there's a question that came over from LinkedIn Live that
says, thank you, Yulong, for the great talk. Have you and your
team considered the use of R Markdown to integrate the
report writing with the analysis and reporting?
Yeah. The first pilot, R Markdown is used for the
reporting part.
Awesome. Let me go back over to some of the LinkedIn questions
here, too. And one was, would FDA accept submissions with R
despite the fact that R does not come with any warranty?
Well, so I wouldn't say it's not come with warranty. It's more
like, as an organization, you become a customer of an
open-source software, because that's not like a closed
source where they have some pure statement. So often, they
also have a PDF file to clarify how R can be used in the
clinical trial development part. And for an organization, it
becomes the organization as a custom also to maintain
documents to clarify as an organization how you are using
open-source software following the GXP guidance. Once that's
been cleaned, I think that's sufficient for the analysis
part. So as clarifying the FDA classification, FDA can see
that you use some software that's being developed by a
company and open-source.
Awesome. Thank you. Phil, I'm going to turn it over to you to
ask the next question.
All right. Let me see if I can find one over here streaming in
from LinkedIn.
Or I can ask one from Slido if you didn't find one.
So I found one here that I thought was pretty cool. It
says, how are the formats handled in R? And I suspect
that's a question on maybe the data formats for clinical
trials. I know, Yilong, you're pretty active in that space.
What was that like for you tackling the data management
side of these clinical workflows?
Yes. The data format is language-independent. So we
definitely will follow the SDTM data standard. And FDA
requires data to be submitted in XPT format. That's open-source
format, even though it's developed by SAS. So in other
words, it's the same workflow we need to achieve, no matter
we are using any software language.
Thank you. So I'll go over to some of the anonymous questions.
And one is, what steps did you take to validate the R packages
themselves?
Yeah. I will just recommend one pharma stock paper we developed
last year. So we provide clear guidance, like a step-by-step
instruction. So in general, it's a follow-up how to recommend
our package book. So we use a structure to go through them.
But we need to pre-specify the testing plan. We also need some
independent testing and potentially double programming
for the code. So as I mentioned, you definitely will need some
execution resource to quantify and develop internal R package.
So this can mimic the existing process to other languages you
already have in your validation.
I think I got one here. Rachel, that's pretty good. Someone asked
about how to approach macros in R, or similar things to macros
in R. What has that been like for you using R?
Yeah, that's also a question discussed a lot while we started
R. So for now, we're trying to see how to provide end-to-end
solution. Because the way to mix multiple languages can create
additional challenge from the IT, from your internal process,
for which part of the process you want to use SAS R, become
unclear in your process. So for now, we haven't go through the
detail how to hybridly use SAS in one particular analysis. But
in a study, where you have multiple deliverables, you can
have some deliverable in SAS, some deliverable in R, that can
be executed independently.
I think one thing, too, the question is trying to tackle is
what were similarities in the R experience for you in putting
together the clinical trials to what others may have experienced
with macros? Was that the functions that you built? Was it
the packages that you designed? Did you have different routines
or workflows that you shared within the team in R that were
reproducible and could be packaged up and shared?
Yeah, my experience is that different companies have
different workflows for how to use SAS macro to generate the
results. And it's the same in R, right? Probably if you consider
Merck's flow, Roche's flow, that can be different. So in the
R4CSR, we provide one recommendation, how to do the
project management, and we measure where to save each of
the files in the infrastructure within R package. This is how
we are thinking a way to handle a large amount of table figure
listing required for analysis.
Thank you. Oh, sorry, Phil, did you want to go to that one?
I was just going to ask a question that I'm selfishly
interested in just based on some of the work that we're
doing with R and Pharma is Shiny. Did your team look or
think about using Shiny in the submissions process?
Well, this probably you can get more answer from Roche team.
Yeah. So definitely, I think the second pilot, as mentioned,
is about the Shiny app part. I think the team actually working
on that to explore how to use Shiny with the ECTD and
potentially reduce, you know, reduce Shiny.
Very cool.
Thank you. I see Sylvia asked a great question. I think it was
coming through from LinkedIn, and it was, thanks, Yilong. In
your experience, are the external reviewers at FDA for R
versus SAS the same group? Trying to think if there would
be a delay cause in review since SAS is more popular for
the past two decades.
I wouldn't represent FDA. My general hearing when we have
the working group, so FDA member have people familiar both
R or SAS or ISOC. And also in FDA's guidance, it's also
recommend you indicate a software you use in the type C
meeting for pre-IED submission. So in that way, FDA can be
aware what kind of software you are trying to use.
Sorry, I froze for a second. Phil, if you can take the next
question.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. So I see, let me see what we have here. The
page is refreshing on me. So I'm trying to keep up with how
fast it's moving. So one question that I saw was about
Admiral. I don't know where it went, but I think the question
was people are interested in using Admiral for prepping
data sets for clinical trials. Here I just found is that any
other package for clinical trials data set creation which
is useful? I don't know if we lost.
Yeah, I think Admiral is a wonderful project. A group of
people are trying to see how to develop the Admiral data set
code in a central place. In general, for most data
manipulation, I would say high diversity is sufficient. So for
your exploration or for develop our code for the data set
generation.
Thanks Yilong. I see someone else asked on LinkedIn is Shiny
Meta. Is the Shiny Meta package a better way to build
reproducibility for the FDA?
I don't have exercise on that.
So I can just provide some color. So Shiny Meta is a
package that was created by the Shiny team in our studio
probably about two or three years ago, and it helps
implement reproducibility within workflows within Shiny
applications. So I would say, you know, stay tuned or watch
some of the Shiny for submissions working group
information on the R&Pharma website. There's a couple
different approaches to reproducibility via Shiny, and
it will be interesting to see what becomes more of a standard
as more Shiny apps are shipped off through the submissions
process. But I do think it's a great way for reproducibility,
but it also takes a little bit of learning.
So it will be interesting to see if it's adopted or if
there's other preferred approaches.
Awesome. I just want to take a second to address a few
questions about where the slides exist. So I just put on
the screen right here the slides for today that Yilong had
shared with us before the event, and then also a few
questions around the recording. So one of the great things
about using this live streaming tool is that the recording
will be there immediately on YouTube, so I'll be sure to
share that link there as well.
Okay, let me go over to a few other questions, and thank you,
Tom, for helping organize these for us in the back end.
Okay, this is a bit of a long question, so let me take a
second here. Tanisha asked, what is the expectation? So,
oh, sorry, it disappeared for a second. Okay, all data sets
and display creation in SAS and QC in R, or vice versa, or
only display creation in SAS and QC in R? And I think
everybody can read the question too, but, or a total mix and
match of SAS and R would be fine for FDA submission.
Yeah, the voice has sounded loud. If my understanding is
correct, you are referring to some data set created in R or
edited in SAS or vice versa. So, what's the question?
Can you see the question on the screen too?
Okay.
I think what they're getting at is, will submissions be a mix
and match of SAS and R? Because, yeah, it's quite a big
question. Maybe just comment about that, Yilong. Do you
think organizations will mix the two? Will organizations
choose to use R? Will they use R internally for the prep? What
do you think? Or what was this like for your team?
I just feel it's a multi-linguistic way, right? But
for particular task, it's better to be consensus on the
tool to be used, right? For example, if the goal is to
create analysis for survival, it's better all the trial for
organization is using the same way instead of you have
multiple way. Even within SAS or within R, you want to use
only one R package instead of multiple package to do the
same thing.
Thank you, Yilong. There are quite a few other anonymous
questions, so I want to make sure that I get over to those
as well. And just so everyone knows, we'll be collecting all
the questions and make sure that we answer these too. So
maybe in some blog post format as well. But one of the
questions is around, so it says, are there any security
issues with using R versus Python? This person said, my
hospital IT team is less familiar with R and has
questions about how secure the packages are.
Phil, would you want to address that?
I mean, I think the thing to know and I think is important
is that CRAN and the R Foundation does a wonderful job
of running checks when packages are submitted. And that
typically is a pretty good thing to lean on and to
understand. And some organizations have some scanning
tools and things that they use internally. But that usually
is enough for people to understand for what it takes to
get a package to CRAN, which is not, it's a big undertaking
and it's a lot and, you know, for package developers to
maintain and support. And so that's a big part of it.
Awesome. I just put a link on the screen right now that
might be helpful for the person who asked the question
too. So it's just our champion site and there's a separate
section on working with IT too.
Phil, do you see any other questions?
You know, I think we're after the time. I don't know if we
can keep going all afternoon, if that's okay. But, you know,
I'm sure Yulong's got to get back to his work. But I do see
some more, maybe a blog post and aggregating and collecting
these up would be the right way to approach it. Because Yulong,
there's a lot of interest in this. There's a lot of
questions coming in for you too. So yeah, Rachel, have a
far after did you want to go today?
Well, I don't want to say too much of Yulong's time because
thank you so much for the awesome presentation too. Do you
have time for a few more?
Yeah, probably a couple, a few more.
Okay.
All right. You pick one and I'll pick one. I'll let that,
Rachel.
Okay. You go first.
All right. Let me see here. Let me see what's coming in.
Uh, let me see. Let me see.
So I think the one that is interesting here would be, um,
so I see a lot of questions that I think about Docker and
containers and using that infrastructure for some of this
work. Um, you know, I'm, I'm interested, Yulong, what, uh,
what that was like as did that, was that part of the
conversations? You know, what, what would that look like maybe
in a hypothetical world with the FDA or other regulatory
bodies? Have you, have your, has your team thought about that?
Yeah.
Personally, I haven't tried Docker. I basically have very
limited experience on that. Um, it's definitely a bring up, uh,
in many conversations for last time mission working group.
I think the one challenge here, how to get FDA ready to receive
the information, but from your own organization, I think
Docker could be a very good way or container solution, but I
was seeing like Eric entering our docs from different teams,
they have better understanding or potentially a live stream
on Docker itself. So that would be nice.
Great. Thank you. Um, so one other question, I'll go over to
the Slido. There was anonymous question, which I know we've
touched on reproducibility a bit, but what's the best
practice for a group of programmers using R for
submission, um, to avoid any challenges with reproducibility?
Oops. Yeah. Sorry. I still hear the lagging noise.
Sorry. What's best practice for a group of programmers using R
to avoid any challenges with reproducibility?
Well, I think first thing start to use version control.
Second, have your app profile set properly and in a shared
space that people can all access the same location.
So I think in general, that would be some good way to
enhance reproducibility. And if you're familiar with IE or
package, try to use them to lock your package version.
Awesome. Well, with everybody here, I do want to also have
take a just a second to let you know that we do have another
pharma meetup coming up in August. And if Tom can help me
behind the scenes, I tried to prepare capital for the
And if Tom can help me behind the scenes, I tried to prepare
caption for that to pop up. But if you want to just see all
future events, you can use the short link we just put on the
screen rstd.io slash community dash events. But we will have a
pharma meetup specifically on August 23rd, left led by
Ashton at Bristol Myers Squibb. And Ashton will be presenting
on data as a product, the data science framework for data
collaborations. And I think that will be a great event as
well. I'll share in the chat just the add to calendar link.
If you want to just add that right now. Put it right here.
There you go. And I'll show that on the screen.
So just rstd.io slash pharma dash meetup, and you can add
that event to your calendar to thank you so much. Do you long
for sharing your time with us and your experience? It's great
to be able to learn from you and to see all these awesome
questions from the community to
fill let you weigh in as well. No, thank you. It's always been
No, thank you. It's always been exciting to see the work that
you do with your team. I always love following it, watching it.
And yeah, excited to see what you still produce.
Cool. Thank you. Thanks. Yeah. See ya.
Have a great rest of the day, everybody.